[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, we always hear about big startup
exits. you know, people becoming
billionaires, companies getting
acquired, going IPO, etc. But I don't
think that's most of them is not that.
That's just the ones we talk about. You
never hear about the scores of other
ones that always fail.
>> No, this is called survival bias, right?
So, you only ever hear about the winners
because all the losers are basically
gone and can no longer uh communicate.
>> That's right. And then the other thing
is that most startups fail and you know
VCs talk about oh I need one winner for
every you know whatever hundred maybe 20
losers or whatever they're probably few
in the middle they get two or three x
returns but that's not what delivers the
big money but yeah it's funny because
it's the losers that's the norm that's
the expectation going in with any series
of investments and yeah we really should
talk about losers more often.
>> Yeah I'm into it. Let's talk about
losers. I'll say one other thing too
which is that when we talk about a lot
of startup investing particularly in
technology you know you don't really
think of them as having assets or a lot
of assets that can be sold right so when
a sort of cardboard box manufacturer
goes bankrupt or whatever well there's
probably some equipment that can be sold
there's land maybe there's a building
that could be reproposed some
intellectual property maybe I don't know
for some of these with a lot of tech
companies it seems like there's nothing
there if they don't succeed and then
there's like all right you just pull the
plug and everybody moves on but I don't
really know if that's the case like I
don't actually know what happens at that
moment of death
>> well from what I remember bankruptcy
tends to be uh pretty complicated in in
various ways and I'm thinking back this
is the ultimate extreme example but the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy that took 14
years
>> and I remember covering it for like
years and years and years and years and
they had all these counter parties, this
big waterfall of creditors and things
like that. And I wonder how it works for
I guess smaller VC companies.
>> Totally. And it seems like that whole
court experience is probably something
you might want to avoid if you can. So
anyway, we really do have the perfect
guest to talk about what happens when a
company fails, what happens when the
startup fails. We are talking with David
Johnson. He is a managing principal at
Resolution Financial Advisors. They're a
financial advisory firm based out of Los
Angeles that focuses exclusively on the
insolveny world. So, we're going to
learn about all of this. David, thank
you so much for coming on the podcast.
>> Thank you, Joe and Tracy. I'm delighted
to be here.
>> This is going to be a lot of fun. Why
don't you start off? What do you do or
what does Resolution Financial Advisors
do? What is your sort of typical client
and what are they looking for?
>> Resolution Financial Advisors is a
financial advisory firm. It's true, but
we don't do a lot of the work that other
financial advisories firms do. I started
my career at Alvarez and Marcel a long
time ago. I think I was employee number
21 of what is now a 10,000 person firm.
>> Wow.
>> And I did restructuring work and interim
management work and forensic accounting
work there. So, I've done a lot of that
in my career, but that's not what we do
anymore. We focus like a laser beam on
what I call the insolveny world. that is
alternatives to bankruptcy and other
ways to wind down companies
>> create value by recovering value and
sometimes we do use the bankruptcy code.
I am a bankruptcy specialist. I'm a
chartered financial analyst and I am a
certified insolveny and restructuring
adviser and so bankruptcy is the right
tool in some cases but for most of the
people with whom I do work it's not the
right solution. So, why don't we talk
about the various solutions that are
potentially on the table? Because I
think a lot of people will recognize
something like chapter 11 bankruptcy. I
know as the daughter of a commercial
airline pilot, I am certainly familiar
with chapter 11 bankruptcy and that
allows you to, you know, keep operating,
keep the business going while you sort
out your various creditors. And then
there's chapter 7, which is an actual
liquidation.
And then there's, I assume, more
creative workouts that you are advising
on. What are the options?
>> That's a really good summary, Tracy.
Thank you. Yes. Chapter 11 is the
restructuring. That's where you get a an
automatic stay, a pause from your
creditors, and a chance to catch your
breath, raise new money under favorable
terms, conduct a sale of the assets in a
very, very court supervised process. Has
its place. I've been through many of
those. They are terrific if you want to
restructure a company. Many buyers
buying assets out of bankruptcy will
prefer a judge's order to do it that
way. Chapter seven, as you said, is when
you throw the keys on the table and walk
away. And bankruptcy court will appoint
a independent attorney, a bankruptcy
trustee, they're called, but they tend
to be people who are not specialists at
selling esoteric assets. You don't
really expect any value recovery in a
chapter 7. So what we do is we
specialize in alternatives that give the
company a little bit more control and
certainly don't ask them to incur so
many costs. For example, to get into a
chapter 11 bankruptcy, you almost
certainly need upwards of a hundred or
$200,000 just to give a retainer to your
bankruptcy council.
>> Wow.
>> Sometimes that's warranted, but for the
companies we'll be talking about today,
it's not a wise use of money, especially
when you don't have an expected outcome
where there will be a sale or a
restructuring. You simply want to shut
down. I have one really short question
then a real question. Like I've never
heard of like a chapter 6 bankruptcy.
Does that exist or what's up with all
those other chapters?
>> There are other bankruptcies. There are
some especially for farmers for example.
There are some that deal with
international companies in the United
States. But chapter 11, chapter 7, and
then chapter 13 are the ones you hear
about most of the time.
>> Got it. Okay. That was just one of those
questions I've been dying to get off my
chest. I probably could have asked Chad
GPT that and got a decent answer, but
now I got that out of the way. You
mentioned esoteric assets. So I imagine
that there are some types of assets that
are very easy for anyone to sell like a
building or something. It's not very
complicated offices whatever and then
what is an esoteric asset for which if
you're not a specialist in it you might
really not know how to get top value for
it.
>> So I do a lot of work in the new
economy. I've spent most of the past 20
years working with Silicon Valley firms
who have tech startups biioarma clean
energy things that are very intellectual
propertyheavy.
It is sometimes the case that in selling
a company's assets, we have machinery
and equipment or inventory or something
that could easily be auctioned. But if
you have a patent portfolio for a
specific technology or if you've got a
drug in development or you've got a
special software that does something
unique, there's no benchmark for that.
There's no open outcry auction system
that you can conduct for that. You've
really got to find the right buyers
narrowly tailored and conduct an effort
to monetize those assets.
Okay, I want to talk about the losers
because I am a firm believer, you know,
you always read all those business books
that are like here's this massive
company that was a huge success story
and no one ever writes about the ones
that didn't make it as you mentioned at
the beginning, Joe. So, one thing I'm
wondering in your many many years of
doing this, have you observed like a
commonality among companies that fail?
Is there something that is I guess
endemic to all the failures?
>> I wouldn't say so. The people that are
doing the investing in those companies
have a lot more information and probably
are a lot more intelligent than I am.
There was a recent book out a year or so
ago called the venture mindset and it
makes the point that Silicon Valley
venture firms don't really mind losing
money. They don't mind investing in
something that won't succeed. They're
much more concerned about missing the
ones that do succeed. right?
>> They know that eight out of 10, perhaps
more, but my number is eight out of 10
investments will either break even or
fail completely. It's the other two or
the other one out of that 10 that will
carry the fund for the year. So, they
cast a wide net. They do their best to
pick intelligently, of course, but they
cast a wide net and most of them need to
be shut down.
>> Well, what's the trigger or the catalyst
from going to losing money for years and
years and years to an actual bankruptcy
and failure?
>> Good question. That's when they come to
me. The companies come to me when
they're perhaps pre-revenue. They're
almost always pre-p profofitability.
They are relying probably on the next
trunch of venture funding to come in. If
their plan says we're going to burn a
certain amount of money and the venture
partners are going to continue to fund
us,
>> eventually the venture fund runs out of
patience, the fund is is full or old, or
they simply don't believe in the idea
anymore. That's the first thing. If that
money doesn't come in, you can't make
payroll, you can't operate. Or perhaps
they've got a secured lender like
Silicon Valley Bank. I do work with
them. They do a lot of venture
investing. The bank may run out of
patience. The bank may have to write
down the loan. The bank may want to
recover their debt. Okay? And they'll
cut off their line of credit perhaps or
simply fail to advance them any more
money. Or perhaps the venture firm has
tried to sell the company, tried to sell
the technology, they've run an
investment banking process and no buyer
has emerged. So what do you do when you
come to the end of the road? There's no
more cash to pay payroll. You can't
continue funding your company. What do
you do?
>> All right. So, they come to you and as
you said, there are going to be these
esoteric assets in at least some cases
for which a typical courtappointed
liquidator does not have the specialty
to get the max dollar for them.
Incidentally, I imagine there are
situations in which you don't have the
specialty, but you have to learn it or
you have to focus on that. So let's say
I'm doing something novel and I don't
drug discovery or whatever it is you can
give us the example some new type of
asset comes to you your job is to get
Maxeller you haven't really dealt you
don't know this specific thing yet maybe
because it's novel give us an example of
some esoteric asset and how you sought
out to find the buyer who was able to
pay max dollar you know Paul McCartney
once said that he was fortunate because
in his line of work he did not need to
know how to read music.
>> Yeah,
>> I deal in broad-based technology. I'm,
as I said, clean techch and biioarma and
software and AI, all of which I know
nothing about.
>> I don't need to be a specialist in the
technology. I need to know how to find
the people that know it. So, I want to
put those assets in front of the right
people.
>> I run what I call a mini investment
banking process. We have to do it
quickly. We don't have much money. The
people that are at the company are going
to be gone very, very soon. So, I don't
do it for six months. I do it for eight
weeks. I sum up the technology. I put it
into a little package and I put it in
front of the 50 to 100 companies in that
very narrowly targeted space, whatever
that space happens to be.
>> Okay?
>> I want to make sure that everybody in
that respective industry has a chance to
look at it and opine. I don't have to
learn it. I have to know enough to talk
about it a little bit, but I'm there to
bring people to the table. I want to put
them in front of the people who invented
the technology, the people who can tell
everybody why it's the greatest thing.
and let the market tell me what it is.
>> So, give us an example of ad technology
or give us a story about where you had
to do that.
>> Long time ago, I worked on a company
called Proteiogenics. It was more than
10 years ago, so I feel comfortable
releasing the name. They were doing
research in neonatal disease. They had
collected oh, I don't know how many
pints of vaginal fluid all in deep
freeze in the basement of their
laboratory.
Didn't have the ability there a
secondary market for vaginal fluid?
>> Well, that was my job to find out.
>> Oh my.
>> That's exactly right. Now, there were
patents and there were research and
there were medical tests and there were
patient records all analyzing for
disease for whatever disease they were
looking for.
>> We ultimately did sell that technology
to a large I think Boston-based
pharmaceutical company. I don't know
what ever happened to it from there, but
I had to manage that process. The
company closed overnight. The facility
was locked with the vaginal fluid in the
deep freezers and I had a landlord who
wasn't very happy about that. So my job
was to two things. My job is always two
things. Number one, monetize the assets.
Do it quickly before the ice cube melts.
I had to find a buyer.
>> You're being very literal here. Like
it's a melting ice cube and this is
sometimes a cliche in the world, but
you're talking about literal melting
refrigeration. Keep going. It got a
little dicey because the landlord locked
me out. Now, landlords aren't supposed
to be able to do that in California, but
I wound up having to negotiate something
and keeping the lights on until such
time as I could run the sale process,
get people interested, back up the
technical data, and move those freezers
out on refrigerated trucks, all while
the clock was ticking, while I had a
very limited budget to pay the rent and
to keep the electricity on. Now, that
was a good outcome again because we sold
the technology. I'm thinking, if I
remember correctly, maybe $2 million,
which is a great outcome in my business.
That was probably enough to repay the
secured lender. There was often a bank
that's first in line to get paid. And
then there are unsecured creditors who
come second, trade creditors, landlords,
things like that. So, we're going to try
to to get as much. Now, there was
probably $50 million invested in that
company from various funds, lenders,
equity investors, and so we're not going
to get those guys repaid, but we want to
source as much value as we can. Somebody
will say to me, "How much is a
technology worth?" And my answer is
always, "I have no idea, but I'm gonna
find out." How am I gonna find out? As I
said before, we're going to talk to
everybody in the industry, everybody who
knows this technology, everybody who is
in a position to say, "This might be
useful to me, and we'll let them speak."
Sometimes the answer is no one.
>> Who is the buyer for the fluid and the
fridges? it. I don't recall the name of
the buyer, but it was I remember a large
Bostonbased biotech company with a
well-known name. I just remember that as
the buyer. And then the day the other
thing I remember was the day we moved
out, we had the technology backed up on
an external hard drive. Again, they had
paid $2 million for it. And when they
went to leave, they couldn't find it. We
found it in the trash can.
>> Oh my god.
>> So things are a little bit wild west, a
little bit touchandgo, but that's the
kind of work we do.
[Music]
I'm just going to get very um voyeristic
about corporate failures, I guess, and
just ask for a bunch of specific
examples, but have you ever gone into a
company and just, you know,
>> shook your head in disgust or surprise
at what's been going on? like how could
this company actually have been running
this way for I don't know however long.
>> It is often surprising to me that the
destruction of value is so great. If you
told me $50 to $100 million was invested
in X and there's nothing to show for it
or maybe the technology has a buyer for
a million or $2 million. Where does the
money go? That's a very good question
and I've been doing this a long time and
I I don't really have a good answer for
that. You know, something I'm curious
about is will it could if when a company
is on its deathbed, if I were a founder
or if I were a board member or whatever,
like I would be pretty checked out. Like
I'm kind of not surprised in some
instances that like, you know what, some
important bit of technology, it's on a
hard drive, etc. gets thrown in the
trash or no one really cares about
keeping the refrigeration bill going.
But, you know, if you're whatever
involved in this, like you might be
thinking about your next thing. This is
dead. This is a waste of time. I see no
future upside. Talk about like those
late stages and who actually is
incentivized to till the very end till
the keys are handed over till the sale
is made. Like how do you get them
focused on extracting that last value
when most people I would imagine want to
move on at that point?
>> That's an excellent segue, Joe. So how
do we get hired? Why do people bring us
in? It's exactly right. If I'm on the
board of a company, I'm probably
residing at a venture capital firm or a
private equity firm or maybe a venture
lender and once I see that there's not
going to be any recovery or minor
recovery,
>> why would you want to spend another
second on it
>> or another dollar? That's exactly right.
So, I'd rather go focus on my things
with upside. So, they want to as quickly
as possible hand it off to me. So, under
the rubric of my business, we very
often, not always, but very often engage
in a formal kind of insolveny process.
known as an assignment for the benefit
of creditors, okay? Or ABC for short.
>> It's a form of insolveny that's well
recognized in many states. It's not
under federal bankruptcy law. It's under
state law in California, state law in
Delaware. Has a long storied history.
It's nothing new. Goes back to English
common law. Under an ABC, a company
says, "We have assets. We have debts. We
can't continue to operate the business.
So, we're going to take all of our
assets and assign them to a third party
trustee. That's me. And I have, again, I
have two jobs. One, turn those assets
into cash, try to collect as much money
and put it in a trust account for
creditors. And my second function is to
do the administrative wind down of the
company. Get the final tax returns
prepared. Store the books and records.
Make sure the W2s go out to the
employees at the end of the year. Wind
down the 401k under Orisa law properly.
All the administrative things that board
of members really do care about and
should care about but don't have the
expertise or the interest to do
themselves.
>> Therefore, when the transaction happens,
when the company signs over these assets
to me, the board generally resigns that
same day. H
>> in a Delaware dissolution, if the
company's just going to file paperworks
to close the company without a formal
insolveny process, Delaware requires at
least one director stay on the hook as a
director for three years,
>> which means you've got to keep, you
know, insurance in place. You've got to
continue to bother the directors with
items he may be at risk. In this case,
they don't have to. They put all of the
work on the shoulders of me and my
partners. And we have a legal fiduciary
duty to do the things we've talked
about, monetize the assets and wind it
down. And it's very often we never talk
to those directors again.
>> I'm thinking how to frame this question,
but does anyone ever try to influence
your decisions as a trustee who is, you
know, supposed to be independent
following the law? Does anyone ever try
to kick themselves up the waterfall or
something like that?
>> That's a good question. I've had very
few experiences like that. We handle the
insolveny process very strictly. We
adhere to a lot of the same rules that
occur in chapter 11 in federal
bankruptcy. The veneer of having the
formal ABC insolveny process is itself
powerful. We tell our companies if you
just walk away and you owe the bank
money and you owe unsecured creditors
money, people are going to be angry.
People are going to look for somebody to
sue. People are going to perhaps push
for an involuntary bankruptcy. You guys
don't want any of that. You want to walk
away. Instead, make resolution the
target. Give somebody a place to file a
claim. Give them someone to yell at. Let
them know there's a process. And give
them the assurance that you're acting
independently. And if there's any money
to distribute, you'll get your fair
share.
>> Are you paid to be yelled at? Is that
basically it?
>> I am paid to be yelled at.
>> Okay. Well, the other thing I wanted to
ask is I mentioned at the beginning the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, which you
know took more than a decade to resolve
and was perhaps an extreme example, but
you do often hear about bankruptcy
proceedings that go on for years and
years and years. And in your business,
it sounds like you're trying to be
pretty fast with the windown, right?
You're trying to get as much money as
possible and maybe that means you have
to move really, really quickly. So, I'm
curious how you kind of balance the need
for speed with the financial and legal
complexities of actually winding down a
company.
>> Bankruptcies that go on for a long time
do so because there are material assets
that have to get sold or divvied up and
you often have a huge constituency of
creditors. Those creditors can form
their own committee. They can hire their
own counsel, their own financial
adviserss. There's many competing
interests. You're right. Leman would be
an extreme example. That was my old
boss, Brian Marcel. We spent years doing
that one. In these cases, you don't have
that in my cases because you have a
single asset or you have assets that
have unknown value and likely several
million dollars at most. We're not
talking about a billion dollars in most
cases that go through my process. So,
there's less to manage. You don't have
some of the the legal benefits of
bankruptcy, but nor do you have the
restrictions. You don't have to ask a
judge for permission to do all sorts of
things. You don't have to usually have a
large staff of financial adviserss
managing the cash. It is true that
sometimes in my processes we continue to
run the operations of the company, but
on a skeleton crew and maybe for a few
months at most. So they're not nearly as
complicated. The outcome is not nearly
as fraught for so many creditors. But I
will give you one example of when we had
hoped to do an ABC but wound up doing a
chapter 11 instead. Hm. There's a
company a few years ago that was in the
sports business. They had a website that
accumulated or curated sports writing.
We had one sports writer who only wrote
about the Florida Marlins and one sports
writer that only wrote about this team
in San Francisco. Sorry, I'm not much of
a sports buff. So, they had a collection
of people all of whom were contracted
with this company. The company had the
website and was a well-known brand.
>> We had hoped to do an assignment for the
benefit of creditors because we had $10
million of debt. We had a buyer who
wanted to pay $10 million for the
assets. Sounded like a great match.
Unfortunately, there are special rules
in bankruptcy that come in handy here
that we can't take advantage of in the
outside of the bankruptcy process.
Specifically, in bankruptcy, if you have
contractors like that, if you have
executive contracts, you can drag those
contracts along and put them in a sale
to a buyer. And those contractors have
to go along with that along with a
bankruptcy court. In an ABC, I don't
have that power. So I would have had to
negotiate with a hundred or 200 sports
writers to get them to go along with the
sale to the buyer and that was not
>> tenable.
>> Therefore we filed a chapter 11. We
processed the sale with the buyer
through a chapter 11 363 sale process
and the sale was completed. Now here's
the downside. We had a $10 million loan.
We had a $10 million buyer.
By the time the bankruptcy process was
paid, bankruptcy council and my firm and
the creditors committee and their
counsel and their financial adviserss
and the delays and the special insurance
and the funds that had to be set aside,
the buyer did pay $10 million. The
lender only walked away with seven.
>> The lawyers always win, huh?
>> There are a lot of people who take a
toll on the way through bankruptcy. Yes,
>> that sounds like a good way to put it.
Tell us about another weird esoteric
asset for which you had to find a buyer.
>> I have a cute little story from a while
back. Company called Co-apt, CO A P was
developing some new technology for for
cosmetic surgery. We did operate that
company for a few weeks. We did run a
sale process and we did find a buyer.
Now, a couple funny things about this
company. First, when we go into a
company like this, we have to remember
sell the assets, but we also have to
wrap everything up. People get up from
their desks and walk away. They leave
things almost as if they were taken by
aliens in some cases. So, we do
everything. Remember, the board put us
in charge. We've got to monetize the
assets, but we've got to report to the
landlord. We've got to get rid of the
furniture perhaps. Back in the vaginal
fluid company, I forgot to mention there
was E.coli in their laboratory.
>> Lovely. Lovely. So, we very often
contract with hazardous materials firms
to make sure we we clean those things
up. That's part of the deal. Remember,
we're putting a bow on these things for
the directors and they expect to not
have they don't want to hear about any
blowback any anything uh later on. So,
we have a full service process here. So,
at Co-App though, remember this was
cosmetic surgery. They had a technology
for a special device with hooks that
they would drill into your skull and
then they would pull the skin up over
those hooks.
>> I've seen pictures of that. That was
that was the technology that was being
developed.
>> I've seen these images. It's so
disturbing. I can't even believe that's
real. Anyway, keep going.
>> It's real and and we did sell it to
somebody. Somebody found value in that
enough to get the bank repaid almost in
in that case. But the real trick of the
story here was that to practice this, to
experiment on this, to develop this
technology, you actually need real human
heads to do it apparently.
>> Lovely.
>> So, as we were moving out, we found four
or five human heads in the freezer. So,
if you're a director of a company, if
you're in Silicon Valley and you're
deciding where to allocate your
investments and you find out that this
one's gone down, do you want to be the
one making the decision or trying to
figure out how to get rid of things like
that? I I have lots of stories about
things that just nobody would want to
deal with. Now, you might ask yourself,
what do you do with human heads?
>> Yep.
>> You'll be surprised to learn that there
are actually people that specialize in
this industry. A van rolled up.
These are people that look like they
might have worked for the circus.
This is not an industry where you
attract everyday run-of-the-mill people,
I suppose. So, I deal with things like
that. I had nuclear waste in one of my
deals.
>> Wait, wait. What do they do with the
heads?
>> I wasn't going to ask that question.
>> Oh, okay.
>> I'm sorry. I don't have more to the
story, but we uh we found somebody to
take them off.
>> My job was to get the human heads off
and then move on with life.
>> Your job is done.
>> I divide the world into two sections.
things that are my problem, things that
are not my problem. And I find that I'm
much happier that way.
>> Yeah.
>> But I did have nuclear waste one time.
There was a a nuclear medicine company,
not buckets of glowing rods, but you
know, something you could hold in your
hand, but still it needed to be disposed
of properly. Once again, these are
things that people who signed up to be a
director don't want to spend their time
solving.
>> I was about to ask, what's the weirdest
thing you ever had to sell, but I'm
assuming, you know, human heads would be
up there along with nuclear waste. So
maybe I'll ask instead. What's the most
creative buyer solution that you have
come up with?
>> Well, let me tell another story then.
And I I don't want to mention the name
because it was a Fortune 500 company
that was involved, but I'll tell you
enough to be interesting. I got a call
about a year and a half ago from an
attorney who sends me business here in
New York. Actually, they said, "My
client has a disaster. They need to talk
to you right away." I get on the phone
with the board of directors. H we just
found out the CEO has been lying to us
and we're out of cash and we can't make
payroll and we've got to shut down right
away. Okay, so we came in took over and
turns out the company and I again I
can't get too specific. I can tell you
it was so new economy that it just
screams peak.com
silliest concept that I had heard in a
long time and I wish I could tell you
what it was. company was teed up to be
sold for $50 million
and the CEO was running out of cash but
trying to extend his runway to get to
the sale. So he was going to hard money
lenders almost like check cashing shops
and borrowing $250,000 at a time again
and again and again to try to pay for
payroll and extend his runway till he
could get the sale done.
>> He ran out of time. The board found out
that he was doing this. They found out
they didn't have any cash left over and
they shut the company down right away.
Now, the buyer was still very interested
in the company, but the company didn't
really exist anymore. All of the
employees were terminated. All the
systems were shut down, but they still
had the the technology. They still had
the patents. They still had the
interface. They still had the customer
base. They still have the business plan.
So, the buyer said, "We'd still like to
buy the technology, but we're not going
to pay $50 million anymore." So, we
negotiated a little bit. We shopped the
company around a little bit, but these
guys were at the table and they were
ready to buy.
They bought the company for $15
million15.
They got essentially the same
technology. Now, they had to put Humpty
Dumpty back together again, but they got
a great bargain buying the company
through this ABC insolveny process.
Didn't have to go through bankruptcy.
Didn't have to pay all those fees. It
was done in a matter of weeks, not
months, and they got what they were
looking for. At the same time, I was
able to collect enough money to repay
the venture lender in full,
>> which is rare. Now, there are unsecured
creditors that weren't paid, and equity,
of course, is completely out of the
money, but the technology lives on. They
hired some of the former employees. The
senior lender got paid. That's a pretty
good outcome in my world.
[Music]
I don't know if you have experience with
this, but to my mind, it strikes me that
for finding the right buyers, it seems
like this is where AI could be really
useful. You come upon some asset that
you've never experienced before, like
human heads, etc., And then I go in and
say, "What is the type of buyer that
would maybe be in the market to purchase
human heads or whatever?" I'm curious if
you found that to be the case because I
imagine, you know, your rolodex, your
intuition, the research you do, but have
you found that technology over time in
your industry has made it easier to
rapidly locate the ideal buyer of
certain certain assets?
>> A a bit. Now, I'm 54. My partners are
younger than I am, so they're more
interested and savvy at doing that. But
when I find a company who has an asset
for sale, I say to the the owners of the
company or the inventor of the
intellectual property or the president
of the company, tell me, you know,
>> oh yeah,
>> the top five companies that that should
buy this, your competitors, your
customers, your suppliers.
>> Give me the top four or five people that
you know off the top of your head, and
then I'm going to use AI to develop a
larger list. Got it?
>> I can usually get that to 50 or or up to
a hundred of people really targeted.
I've got thousands of people in my
database, but I don't want to send this
opportunity to everybody. I want the
people in that industry have a chance to
look at it.
>> I just typed into perplexity the
question, I have legally acquired some
human heads that I need to sell. Who
would be a potential buyer? And it's
given me a list including specific names
such as Bone Dealers, Skulls Unlimited,
and the Bone Room. I don't know if
that's a hallucination.
>> Might be hallucinations.
>> Yeah, that's Skulls Unlimited.
>> Well, that's fantastic.
>> Maybe it exists. That's pretty funny. We
do a lot of work with new economy, but
but old economy as well. For example,
right now we're liquidating two retail
furniture stores.
>> Wait, skulls unlimited. World leader in
real and replica skulls. Oh,
>> and they say, "Do you need a skull
clean?"
>> So, this is a I don't know if they do
human ones. It looks like it's mostly
animals and stuff. Anyway, at least they
Perplexity came up with a company that
is in the skull business. Anyway, keep
going.
>> There are niche industries.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, old economy as well. I' I've
done a lot of brickandmortar work,
especially down here in in the Los
Angeles area versus Silicon Valley. As I
say, we're doing some furniture
companies.
>> At one point, I was serving as a
receiver for a chain of pawn shops.
>> Now, a receiverhip is a little bit
different than a bankruptcy. It's
different than the ABC we talked about.
It is the case that a lender or even
investors don't have faith in management
and they want a babysitter. They want
someone to can keep take control of the
cash, look over management shoulders,
perhaps hire and fire management,
ultimately perhaps sell the company. But
this is not when you want to shut a
company down or destroy something. You
just want some adult supervision. So I
served as a receiver for this chain of
pawn shops, which was really check
cashing stores,
>> but they dealt in gold. They had a big
vault in their headquarters where they
would store some of the gold. If you go
into a check cashaching store and you
have a gold necklace and you want to
borrow $50, they'll keep your gold
necklace. It got very interesting though
when people were depositing their gold
teeth into the vault.
>> And you know, if they don't come back
and repay the loan, the gold teeth stay
in the vault. So, we had a lot of
interesting things to deal with there.
And again, in a check cashaching store,
all cash business, you see a lot of $100
bills, buckets and buckets of those
things floating around. So, new economy,
old
>> Those are easy to value. At least
>> they're easy to value, but new economy,
old economy that there's a lot of
management and judgment calls and what
do I do about this situation in my line
of work?
>> We were talking earlier before we
started, you did a scooter company and
I've wondered about those scooter cuz
you know some of the they're still
going. All the companies in that
business seemed terrible. The ones that
have gone public have done awful.
>> Joe, you were very scooters. Yes, I knew
you were going to say that. I was very
bullish on the scooters. I still
actually like them. When I'm in a city,
it's not a bad way to get around medium
length distances. Nonetheless, my
understanding is that they have not been
particularly at least in the US,
particularly profitable companies. What
happens when they have like a bunch of
old branded uh scooters laying around?
>> That's an interesting question. It isn't
an interesting business. I think it was
probably overinvested in I have a story
with both a good outcome and a bad
outcome.
>> Okay. So, a company called Super
Pedestrian, which is not one I was
familiar with, but it's up there with
Lime and Bird and it does the exact same
thing, has a very large presence in
Europe. The company ran out of cash. The
venture lender, not a bank, but the
venture lender contacted us and said,
"We need somebody to figure out what to
do. How do we get our money back?
There's got to be value here. We
invested X gazillion dollars. We've got
a lot of scooters all over the United
States, all over Europe. What do you
do?" So we started out in Europe. Turns
out there was a lot of interest from
European investors. And so we had
scooters in Spain. We had scooters in
the UK. We had scooters in France. We
had scooters in Germany. We had scooters
in Switzerland. And I don't do a lot of
work in Europe. I don't know European
insolveny law. I don't know all the very
different ones. I sometimes do work over
there, but I rely on local specialists
sometimes. But I had a lot of attention
on that business. Fortunately, we were
able to get council in the UK who did a
fantastic job of corelling all of these
buyers and selling. We didn't have to
take apart the companies this time. We
sold the German entity and this French
entity and the Spanish entity all to a
company I think from Norway who was
wellunded and believed in scooters. And
so we were able to flip that almost in
in a matter of a month or two. And that
business is still going. I still see
them in the news. On the other hand, we
didn't have so much luck in the United
States. We didn't find anybody
interested enough in the local business
here. And after a lot of searching and a
lot of bill paying and a lot of
landlords locking up the scooters, to my
knowledge, uh those scooters are still
sitting on the corners of Los Angeles
and Washington DC and maybe at the
bottom of the
>> unusable and and unusable because once
the technology gets turned off,
>> they're like bricks.
>> Wow. So good outcome in in Europe. I I
wish them well.
>> I like the scooters, but I do think that
there is this element of like sort of
weird public vandalism about it in some
point where like a company just thinks
it can deposit its products all around
neighborhoods. It's like what? Like
where did these come from? And then you
see them in ditches. Anyway, Tracy, keep
going.
>> I was going to ask so the scooters that
are left over, would the company be
liable for anything that like happened
to those or if they I don't know caused
an accident of some sort? If I'm cycling
down the the sidewalk and I accidentally
run into a defunct scooter, could I sue
the failed company?
>> Who would you sue?
>> The company,
>> but it doesn't exist anymore. So, I
can't. So, there's no
>> Oh, you can sue. Yes, you can sue all
day long, but there's nothing to
recover.
>> Okay.
>> That's both a blessing and a curse. I
remember when the scooters first came to
Los Angeles a few years ago, and people
would just throw them in the river,
throw them in the ocean. It was
astounding to me that that business
model could work.
>> Somebody believed in it. There are a lot
of those scooters still around Los
Angeles. And again, they're not useful
unless you have the technology active.
So, I I don't know what happened. I I
wound up leaving that company before
that was fully resolved. But that is the
question. There were all sorts of
government penalties. Cities imposed
fines or wanted to make sure we had
insurance, for example, if we were going
to operate scooters. So, we're a little
bit hamstrung. We don't want to be
operating a scooter company. I've got a
small firm and I'm not staffed. I can
certainly rely on some of the former
employees if I can pay them, but I don't
want to be operating a company like
that.
>> I have just one last question, but one
particularly complicated and interesting
liquidation or sale or failure that's in
the news over the last several months
have been 23 in May, which raises all
kinds of interesting things about like
privacy in particular. I'm curious if
this is a story you followed and whether
you have any insight to bear on how a
situation like that will or should play
out from a legal perspective.
>> I followed it just a bit just enough to
know that I would not want to be making
the decisions as an asne in an ABC in
that case. That's a case that belongs in
bankruptcy court.
>> Okay?
>> Because you've got a judge who will make
the decisions for you. I don't want to
be responsible for selling personal
identifiable information without someone
telling me it's okay.
>> But actually imagine that in a I mean 23
and me is an extreme example because
it's so personal. But I have to imagine
personal identifiable information is
actually got to be pretty common in a
lot of internet startups etc where
people have to submit information to set
up an account etc. I imagine that there
are a lot of maybe not quite as tricky
but still pretty tricky questions that
are raised with some of these companies.
>> We do have to take care. I I sold a
business earlier last year in the
ticketing. Actually, I've done four or
five deals in the ticketing business
like a StubHub type competitor.
>> And there are, of course, credit card
information and and personal
information. We don't generally sell
that. And so, as long as I'm careful
that it doesn't get disseminated out in
the public, I don't have to worry about
that too much. There is sometimes the
case if I sell a company, I have to
review their internet privacy policy to
make sure I'm able to sell the customer
list. Mhm.
>> And we do take that seriously and we do
work with council to make sure that we
aren't going to be on the hook.
Certainly don't want to make those
decisions and have someone come back and
say I did something illegal.
>> I could sit here and listen to corporate
failure stories for hours, but we are
running out of time. So I'm just going
to ask one other question which is for
esoteric assets,
>> how do you go about ensuring that you
have that you're getting a reasonable
price? So something like human heads, I
imagine there is no secondary market for
human heads. There's no What I mean is
there's no exchange showing you a price.
>> There's no benchmark.
>> That's right. There's no benchmark human
head price. So someone could make you an
offer, but I imagine without expertise
in that particular market, you wouldn't
necessarily know if it was a good price
or not. So how do you go about making
sure that you're getting the most money
possible?
>> I get that question a lot and the answer
is there are no benchmarks. There's no
liquid market for these type of assets
that are very unique and very
interesting technology in some cases.
You have to ask the market. Something is
worth what someone else is willing to
pay for it. So, it's important that I
get the opportunity in front of
everybody who might have an interest.
That's why I said earlier 50 to 100
people in that industry. And if I shop
it to all of the people who should know
what it is and how to value it, and they
say, "Sorry, I'm not interested." then I
can be pretty sure it's got no market
value today. If I get four or five
people to say, "Hey, this is
interesting. Let me do some homework.
Let me talk to management. Let me make
an offer." And I get four or five offers
and the offers are all centered around
$3 million. Well, I've identified the
market value of that technology. If I've
got three offers at $500,000 and one
offer at $5 million, I'm going to grab
the $5 million offer. That's the value
of the technology. So, I know better
than anybody else what that technology
is worth. In fact, I had to go to court
only one time, I think, in almost 20
years where it was this co-apt case
again, I'll tell you that, where I sold
the technology for, let's call it, $3
million, and I repaid the secured lender
and there was no money for anybody else.
There was a plaintiff's attorney who was
representing some people who had said
that they were injured, not by this new
technology we discussed, but something
else the company had done, some kind of
dermapiller or something. And those
patients had potential claims,
contingent claims. They said they
suffered injury. They weren't
adjudicated. There were no judgments.
But the plaintiff's attorney may have
had a case as patients may have
suffered. Nevertheless, when we sold the
technology, there was enough money to
pay back the bank and nobody else. The
plaintiff's attorney took us to court
and they said, "Yes, you sold the
company for $3 million, but if you know
what you were doing, Johnson, you would
have sold it for $11 million and we all
would have gotten paid."
>> He says, "I have an ivory tower
economist right here at my desk." and he
says this company was worth $11 million.
And I said, "Really?" He goes, "Here's
my binder. Here are the people that I
reached out to to sell this technology.
50, 60, 70 of them. And here are the 10
that said they were interested in
looking at it." And they signed
non-disclosure agreements. And after
doing their diligence, four of them came
to me with an offer to buy the company.
And I chose the one with the highest
price. So, if your ivory tower economist
wanted to buy this company for $11
million, I sure wish I would have met
it. I would have been happy to sell it
to him. But I know in the real world
that something is worth what someone's
willing to pay. And I asked everybody
and this is what they told me.
>> I'm going to ask one more question. I
can't resist, but is there a lesson
about corporate mortality that you wish
more executives or entrepreneurs would
learn and internalize? If you could give
a piece of advice to executives of
failing companies or companies that are
managing to survive, but there's always
a risk of failure, what would it be?
>> I won the court case. By the way,
>> I'll give you the same advice that that
everybody says.
Coming to us earlier rather than later
is always wise.
>> You only have as long as your cash
runway allows you to be there.
>> So, if you have six months worth of cash
instead of six weeks worth of cash, I
can do a more thorough search. I can
come up with potentially other buyers,
create more value, I can keep more
people around for a longer period of
time. I can make better preparations for
the preservation of the technology. So
earlier is always better. And I do a lot
of contingency planning. People come to
me and say, "I've got an offer on the
table, but I don't know if it's going to
close. So, how do I prepare for the
downside?" Or, "We think we're going to
get that next round of venture funding,
but just in case it doesn't come in,
what do I do?" So, I do a lot of that
kind of planning. And the more time we
have, the better. On the other hand, I
have gotten the phone call before. I
can't make payroll on Friday. Can you
help me?
>> Should have called me earlier. David
Johnson, I think if I were on the board
of a company and you showed up and said,
you know what, tough situation, but
we're going to get you the max dollar. I
think I'd feel really good. I feel like
you'd do a good uh job for us. Really
appreciate you coming on OddLotss and
telling us about this niche that I knew
nothing about. This has been fun. Thank
you, Joe. Thank you, Tracy.
[Music]
Tracy, that was a lot of fun. I didn't
know anything about any of this topic
and uh he was the perfect guest for
that.
>> Yes, a very niche topic for someone who
specializes sometimes in very niche
sales. That was so interesting. I'm
trying to think what my big takeaway is
here. I mean, I guess the emphasis on
how comfortable a lot of Silicon Valley
actually is with losing money for years
and years and years and then how
suddenly that tap can be turned off.
>> Well, so I thought your last question
and his last answer about like sooner
the better
>> was really interesting and really
important. And I just feel like if I
were a founder of a company,
>> I would never do sooner. I would hold
out till the very last second, the last
dollar in my account in order to make
payroll. I would never call David up
until I was absolutely forced out of the
room.
>> Even though, you know, you get into all
what do they call principal agent
problems here, right? Because you're
suddenly operating for yourself as
someone who's trying to keep your equity
in the money in the hopes that it can
going on. Meanwhile, you're burning
through credit or cash and probably, you
know, diminishing their recovery value
by the day.
a lot of interesting uh incentive
disalignment potential at the end of
life there.
>> Yeah. And I imagine that the founders of
startups that might eventually fail,
they're probably optimistic by nature
and so they're probably sat there
thinking they might get a hailmary at
the very last minute and then it doesn't
materialize and it's too late and
they're scrambling to make payroll.
>> I guess this is what the board, right?
The board is supposed to solve some of
these incentive alignment problems and
it's like, bro, come on. You got to give
up. you got to you got to begin the
liquidation phase, which I guess is why
the founder in one of his stories was
taking, you know, personal check cashing
loans to keep it going precisely because
the board maybe wouldn't have let it
keep going had they been aware of the
true financial state of the company.
Although anyway, very interesting
conversation,
>> bro. You got to give up signed the
chairman.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman
Dashelbennet at Dashbot and Kalebrooks
at Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content,
go to bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we talk about how companies die,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Yeah.